4	Minutes
Amb. Falemaka welcomed participants and introduced the purpose and objective of the quarterly strategy meetings (QSMs), which is to facilitate planning for the coming quarter and review previously agreed actions.
The meeting will consider a number of technical areas of negotiations; for each technical area, the meeting will focus on the following questions:
a.	What is the current situation?
b.	What do we expect to happen in the fourth quarter of 2018?
c.	What do we need to do to prepare for the coming phase?
An agenda (document 1) and briefs on each technical area (except MSMEs) were previously circulated to participants (documents 2, 6 and 9).
Before considering technical subjects, the meeting briefly discussed high-level issues, including the future of the WTO and increased appetite by some members to reconsider its operating parameters. The EU had developed some draft proposals for WTO reform and Canada would host a meeting of a group of a dozen or so countries to discuss the subject in October. It was noted that there would also be a meeting of Commonwealth WTO members next week to discuss these issues further.
4.1	Fisheries
Amb. Falemaka provided a summary on the current situation based on the circulated briefing (document 2), including the recent history in the previous quarter and the substance of current technical disagreements.
It was noted that there is a continuing pressing need for an approach to S&DT in fisheries that does not create more wide-ranging political problems in other negotiating areas.  Technical suggestions would be welcome from the TAF2+ team on possible ways to accomplish this.
The NGR’s current schedule for fisheries negotiations is based on three cluster meetings in September (24–28th), November (5–9th) and December (3–7th) (see document 4).  Each cluster meeting will be preceded by an innovative set of “incubator group” (IG) meetings, which aim to generate new ideas in an attempt to escape a familiar deadlock between entrenched positions.  All ideas generated by the IGs will be reported back to the full cluster meeting the following week.  Each IG will meet privately for a morning session, but will then consult with any other delegations during an open afternoon session, providing an opportunity for the Pacific to feed into all IGs.  The IG concept is explained in document 4 (pp 2–3).
There are 18 topics to be discussed by four IGs, which are listed with their allocation in document 4, pp16–17.  Vanuatu is in IG IV, which will discuss topic 11, “distinguishing in the disciplines capacity versus overcapacity; fishing activity versus overfishing” in September.
The main Pacific priority in September will be the text-based discussion (including streamlining the text) on 27th and 28th September.  In subsequent meetings, thematic discussions will also be important, though the September themes were not considered a high priority.
4.1.1	Update on TAF2+ work
Mr. Harbinson updated the meeting on ongoing work by the TAF2+ team.  The team is currently working on documents that will be delivered soon:
•	An analysis of the new negotiating text (document 5), highlighting fisheries management issues and assessing the extent to which established Pacific and ACP positions are reflected in the text.
•	Short notes covering each of topics 1, 2, 3 and 11 to inform consultations with IGs in September.
4.1.2	Outcomes
The following tasks are anticipated in the coming quarter:
•	Input into (potentially all) IGs.  Topics 1, 2, 3 and 11 will be discussed in September, so these are the most urgent on which to agree positions.
•	Agree new textual proposals for text-based discussions (based on document 5).
•	Analyse and form positions on proposals generated by other members as they are received.
•	It would be useful if the TAF2+ Fisheries Specialist could attend the cluster meeting, at least from the afternoon of Wednesday 26th to Friday 28th.  This may not be feasible due to teaching commitments.  The TAF2+ team agreed to provide more information on this promptly.
4.2	Development and S&DT
Amb. Falemaka provided a summary on the current situation based on the circulated briefing (document 6), including a brief history of S&DT over the course of the Doha round.
Progress on the 10 outstanding G90 proposals has been severely inhibited by controversy over “differentiation” between developing countries at various stages of development.  In all likelihood there will be few objections to granting FICs more flexibilities but the question is how to distinguish between this group and other, larger developing countries in a way that would be generally acceptable to the WTO membership.
4.2.1	Outcomes
It was agreed that more creative and pragmatic thinking was required in order to try to identify possible ways to advance this subject.
4.3	Agriculture
Mr. Kerangpuna provided a summary on the current situation based on the circulated briefing (document 9) and outlined upcoming work as described in the work plan detailed in document 8.
The meeting discussed the common difficulty of involving ministries of agriculture in ongoing negotiations in a timely way.  Options for enabling their participation in WTO training were highlighted, including the option to request bespoke training to be provided by the WTO Secretariat to officials in capital (in addition to regular regional workshops facilitated by PIFS).
The meeting noted the wide-ranging nature of upcoming discussion in the next quarter, though it is unclear how subsequent negotiations will be structured.
4.3.1	Outcomes
The meeting felt it unlikely that negotiations will progress much in the coming quarter. Clearly attention will be required when negotiations become more active in future, but close attention may be better focused elsewhere in the next few months.  Nevertheless, continued monitoring is required.  The delay of MC12 to mid-2020 is likely to shift the focus of negotiations towards those subjects that have deadlines earlier than the MC.
The TAF2+ team is available to provide analysis of any new proposals if and when this would be helpful.
4.4	Services
Mr. Kerangpuna provided a summary on the current situation based on the circulated briefing (document 9) and recent history since MC11.
4.4.1	Outcomes
The meeting decided that the TAF2+ Services Specialist should review the following documents and determine if provision of a brief to Pacific members would be appropriate:
•	The current draft negotiating text on domestic regulation (JOB/SERV/272/Rev.4).  This text has been substantially changed since MC11.
•	The proposal “Exploratory Discussion on Market Access” (submitted by Chile, Mexico, New Zealand and Panama).
The meeting considered it unlikely that negotiations would progress significantly in the coming quarter.
4.5	E-commerce
Mr. Kerangpuna provided a summary on the current situation based on the circulated briefing (document 9).
While no Pacific members are part of the current e-commerce group, it was noted that PIFS-Geneva sometimes sits in on these meetings, and that capital-based officials were able to attend a meeting during Geneva Week in July.
Mr. Baikeirewa emphasised the importance of this area for the Pacific and that close attention would be useful.
Mr. Harbinson informed the meeting that work on a briefing was underway and would be circulated later in the month.
Mr. Harbinson suggested that bilateral meetings with Costa Rica and Australia, to exchange views informally, might be valuable, particularly since it was understood that the proponents of the initiative now wished to move towards text-based discussions.  Australia was at the heart of the initiative and was thus well placed to provide insights, while Costa Rica had been active with regard to the development dimension.
4.5.1	Outcomes
PIFS-Geneva decided to explore the possibility of separate bilateral meetings with Costa Rica and Australia.  Members of the TAF2+ team would also attend if possible and available (Mr. Harbinson and, if feasible, E-commerce Specialist Marta Soprana).
4.6	MSMEs
The TAF2+ team will provide a short written briefing to Pacific members soon.
4.7	Any other business
4.7.1	November Geneva Week
The meeting agreed that the support provided by TAF2+ team to the July Geneva Week had been successful and that a similar package would be provided in November (i.e. a short advance written briefing and face-to-face session(s) early in the week).  The briefing may focus more narrowly on active negotiations than in July (most likely fisheries and e-commerce).  The briefing could be confined to one day to conserve resources if this provided enough time, although if the timetable is similar to July this would probably afford only 60–75 minutes.
4.7.2	Next QSM
The TAF2+ team apologised for the difficulty in facilitating the attendance of representatives of Tonga and PNG at this meeting, and outlined plans to improve the process ahead of the next QSM.
The next QSM was tentatively scheduled for Monday 10th December, subject to the emerging WTO calendar.
